tanks on it it has clamshell doors it
has a shallow draught it can land right
on the beach and they're absolutely
fundamentally critical to Normandy and
they have been critical earlier and
they're first used in the Mediterranean
so that's one small example more
important is probably you are learning
who is capable of the stresses of combat
you're learning things about leaders at
all levels from a platoon leading
lieutenant who's perhaps 19 years old or
at most 20 to leading 40 infantrymen up
through core command and army command
and you're learning who has got the
ability to lead other men in the dark at
night who has got the physical and
mental stamina they underestimate the
physical rigor of it as we go into the
war who is and what is the trait that
Napoleon most cherishes in his generals
anybody know lock lock lock who's lucky
who's not lucky Americans are always
uncomfortable with this concept people
kind of squirm in their seats you know
don't you make your own walk not war
sometimes it's made for you for good or
for ill and this is absolutely critical
who among those commanders again at all
levels is lucky and who is unlucky and
we've talked about some of the unlucky
ones john lucas ernest dali at Salerno
and we've talked about some of the lucky
ones Dwight Eisenhower being first among
them there's no one luckier than enemy
by the way he keeps seven lucky coins in
his pocket he takes him out he rubs him
all the time Mark Clark that four-leaf
clover his wife sends it to him he keeps
it in his wallets for the Italian
Italian campaign so yes the answer to
your question is yes we have to go
through this we have to we have to
you're looking for killers and we're
breeding killing divisions we get four
of them out of North Africa and they're
really good
first division 3rd division 34th
division 1st Armored Division and they
are full of killers because that's how
you win you find men who are willing to
kill other men and leaders who are
willing to lead them to kill other men
and that's a painful part of the whole
process then and always has been since
the days of acidities and is today in
thank you sir
you're watching American history TV all
weekend every weekend on c-span 3 to
join the conversation like us on
facebook at c-span history
about fifty years ago on August 10th
1964 President Lyndon Johnson signed the
Gulf of Tonkin Resolution which in lieu
of a declaration of war gave him broad
powers to wage war in Southeast Asia
that resolution was passed by Congress
in response to an August 2nd attack and
an alleged August 4th incident in the
Gulf of Tonkin involving u.s. destroyers
and Vietnamese torpedo boats American
history TV visited the National Security
Archive at George Washington University
to learn about numerous declassified
documents that have shed more light in
the gulf of tonkin
incidents I'm Tom Blanton I'm the
director of the National Security
Archive and we're here on the top floor
of the main library of George Washington
University which is where we live
and we're in a room full of boxes of
declassified documents and it's really
an artifact because most of the
declassified documents we get today are
actually digital it's a lot of
born-digital
scanned or made digital and certainly
the people that use our collections are
using them online in fact in the courses
we teach here at George Washington for
most of these kids if it's not an online
it doesn't exist so so part of our whole
mission has been to get these primary
sources loose from the government
through Freedom of Information Act
request and declassification review
requests and then get them into digital
formats organize and explain them curate
them index them so then students can
find them journalists can find them
citizens can find them and even we get
calls from Congress they they have
questions - how are you funded in where
did you come from we really were started
by a whole group of journalists and
historians back in the mid 1980s who
each of whom had used the Freedom of
Information Act to get documents
Declassified from the government and
they think the piles were stacking up in
their kitchens and their spouses get
these papers out of the house and just
save their families I think they created
the National Security Archive not just
as a repository but as a institutional
memory and a follow-up because we not
only inherited
axes and boxes of documents from these
pioneering journalists and historians
but we also inherited their pending
Freedom of Information requests because
for the really sensitive documents we're
inside the government there's a debate
about well as this really secret or is
it just subjectively secret or can this
be released it can take years to get a
declassification request through the
system it can take in the case of the
gulf of tonkin intercepts intelligence
intercepts this has been an iterative
story for 50 years to get the documents
loose bits and pieces not the whole
truth we're told to the public right at
the time by the president United States
what is an intercept an intercept is
when a u.s. satellite ship station
ground station with really powerful
directional antennas microphones pick up
an electronic communication radio
communication radio telephone
communication or wiretap of somebody's
message and during this period of the
1960's North Vietnam was one of our top
targets for all of our signals
intelligence gathering and so in the
gulf of tonkin context the key
intercepts the key conversations we were
trying to listen to were those between
the North Vietnamese boats torpedo boats
who could do some real damage on our
boats off shore and their headquarters
which was in Haiphong was the
headquarters of the North Vietnamese
Navy we the United States had taken over
from the French as the main sponsor for
the non-communist anti-communist forces
that were basically gathered in South
Vietnam we had help after the French got
beat by the Communists really get dim
pinfu you could track it back even
further and it's a long story but
we probably made a big mistake after
world war 2 by not recognizing the
nationalist aspirations of countries
like Vietnam and instead backing up the
former colonial powers France in that
case there were some reasons we did that
Europe was way more important to us in
Vietnam France we needed this part of
our NATO and rebuilding Europe against
Stalin and the communist threat what
ultimately Churchill called our and
Curtain so we came in on Frances side
while France was trying to keep in
charge of Vietnam the Japanese had beat
them and taken over so here you have the
Vietnamese from the Vietnamese point of
view they're fighting a 50-year war
versus colonial French then the Japanese
came in and threw out the French then
the French came back with our support
and then after the French got beaten
they got thrown out then we came in but
between 1953 and 1964 we had not really
dramatically escalated our presence in
in Vietnam we had supported the the
southerners who had split the country
and refused to participate in any
countrywide elections I think largely
because they they knew at least in the
late 1950s they would have lost Ho Chi
and man the Communists had borne the
greatest weight and beating the French
and fighting back against the Japanese
and they pretty much had the nationalist
cause wrapped around them and so they
probably would have won a free election
at the same time they were communists
and so free elections are purely
utilitarian they're not part of the
Communist toolbox generally so there are
a lot of arguments about this are these
folks in the south really our friends
and allies we had just played a real key
role right before President Kennedy was
assassinated in November 1963 in
approving the replacement of diem the
previous leader previous eight years by
a bunch of generals in a coup
and that was in retrospect seems to be a
turning point American policymakers
including ones close to Kennedy had
gotten really sick and tired of diem and
we're hearing that he was actually
wanting to cut a deal with Hanoi and we
had a lot of rhetoric about how the
south is the freedom and the north is
the tyranny and we got to be there and
and diem wasn't fighting against the
north very vigorously as vigorously as
we thought and we had a lot of counter
insurgency specialists and Graham Greene
wrote some a great book called the Quiet
American about our our hubris and
thinking we could do it right and so so
here we had the generals who were in
charge from late 63 on into 1964 we had
ramped up our support for the generals
some air support some advisors we were
up to I think under Kennedy we had been
up to 10,000 or so advisors and Johnson
was putting more in but we had not
escalated the war by bringing in major
ground troops yet and we had not
escalated the war by doing systematic
bombing campaigns against the north that
would happen a year later in 1965 but in
the summer of 1964 you had President
Johnson running for re-election against
a very conservative figure senator Barry
Goldwater you had the US Navy and the
CIA running all of these covert the OP
plan 34 tests pressures against the
North to figure out what their defenses
were so there was an intelligence
gathering piece of it but also to
ratchet up the pressure I mean part of
the American mind said at that time was
this notion of game theory that you
calibrate pressure and then your
opponent will ultimately respond to the
pressure and by escalating like that
over time you could ultimately force
Hanoi to make a deal or to back down
I think this was a fundamental
misconception by the Americans because
game theory doesn't work on people who
are in their own minds defending their
home lane against just another
imperialist aggressor I think that
Johnson administration in the summer of
1964 was learning some of the wrong
lessons from the Cuban Missile Crisis of
1962 the public myth of the Cuban
Missile Crisis was in Dean rusks phrase
we went i ball to eyeball with the
Rooskies and they blinked I mean we
ratcheted up the pressure we had
military dominance in the area we made
it so tough for them by standing tough
ourselves that ultimately they back down
and that this popular conception we now
know from the underlying documents
especially from the Soviet side was
wrong we actually to his credit Kennedy
got scared about the strong likelihood
that things were slipping out of control
during Cuban Missile Crisis Khrushchev
did too
both of them had been reckless before
the Missile Crisis Kennedy was running
covert operations trying to assassinate
Castro Khrushchev thought he could sneak
in a bunch of missiles disguised as palm
trees and get away with it
LaRoche is reckless to a fairly well but
then they got into the crisis and saw
the possibility of nuclear exchange and
Armageddon and the end of human
civilization and you read some of their
letters and messages back and forth and
you read Bobby Kennedy's meetings with
the Soviet ambassador who was the key
back-channel and you get this strong
sense that the top guys in the Kremlin
and the White House they got it they got
it that things were slipping out of
control that down at the ground level
there were nuclear weapons all over the
place we now know things that Kennedy
didn't know that there was a cruise
missile aimed at Guantanamo if we had
invaded which all the generals wanted to
do Guantanamo would be a synonym for her
Oshima today it'd be a smoking radiating
rubble there were a hundred some-odd
tactical nuclear weapons in Cuba waiting
for an invasion so
that kennedy and khrushchev made a
secret deal was not the public
perception the public perception was a
testosterone what we stood tough they
back down so the same thing was being
applied to Hanoi what's fascinating now
that we can look through the historians
work the inside historians work at the
National Security Agency named Robert
Hancock who pursued the story had access
went and did the basic fundamental work
that intelligence analysts should have
done at the time which was to put all of
the intercepts in one pile and go
through and see what did they say
where did they contradict each other and
especially where did they contradict
this highly selective chronology that
had become the internal secret official
story and then that historian wrote a
highly classified article because it's
full of intercepted signals intelligence
that showed the capabilities of the US
government to listen to the North
Vietnamese is their ordering their boats
around in the down there and off the
coast of Vietnam we can look through the
historians work the inside historians
work the actual texts of the intercepts
of the North Vietnamese conversations
and then listen to President Johnson's
phone calls as he's talking with
secretary Defense McNamara
and begin to understand - huge realities
that were not known to the public at the
time one that the North Vietnamese
attacks on the 2nd of August 1964 were
actually provoked by us they weren't the
unprovoked aggression that was presented
to the American public as the basis for
our bombing back that in fact we were
running all these secret patrols the
so-called de Soto patrols top-secret to
test coastal defences to figure out how
the North Vietnamese radar worked to see
how they would respond and to intercept
their communications among their - naval
headquarters and their actual torpedo
boats on the coast as part of an ongoing
pressure on the North Vietnamese and so
the their attacks on our boats on the
2nd of August were presented as
unprovoked aggression when actually we
had provoked them so this was one of the
big secrets the president knew at the
national the defense secretary knew it
we've got him on tape talking about it
Oh plan 34 mcnamara says you know that
this certainly had something to do with
that attack and the president explained
we probably radar stations lanius
following 24 hours after that they're
aware that we provoked it it was our
secret
Tobes on the coastline is what set off
the north vietnamese to come attack from
the north of me is point of view they're
just defending their coastline I guess
our aggression so we didn't say that
publicly
again repeating some of the same
mistakes the Cuban Missile Crisis
because in what you say publicly then
become something that you're stuck with
that you then have to defend and then
you have to spin out more lies to keep
it alive as your case statement for why
we're there my fellow Americans as
president and commander-in-chief it is
my duty to the American people to report
that renewed hostile actions against
United States ships on the high seas in
the Gulf of Tonkin have today required
me to order the military forces of the
United States to take action in reply
the initial attack on the destroyer
Maddox on August 2nd was repeated today
by a number of hostile vessels attacking
to us destroyers with torpedoes the
destroyers and supporting aircraft acted
at once on the orders
I gave after the initial act of
aggression we believe at least two of
the attacking boats were sunk at the
moment of the fourth of August you have
this false warning from and summarizing
from an intercept but not really giving
an intercept false warning everybody's
on edge the destroyers start reporting
sonar torpedo attack takes them a couple
hours to figure out well maybe that's
just our own wakes we're moving the
destroyers like this which is what you
do to have evasive action if you're
under attack from a torpedo boat but
these distorts are really fast boats
with big propellers and big engines and
they're they're built for speed on the
open ocean so they make maneuvers like
that they set off all kinds of wakes and
those wakes are then picked up by the
other destroyer sonar and then all of a
sudden you got this reinforcement oh my
god
torpedoes in the water oh my god
torpedoes in the water and then you got
commanders of two boats saying we're
under attack we're under attack we're an
attack and it takes about two hours for
commander Herrick to finally figure out
what wait a second on the second of
August we actually saw some of the
torpedo boats we we saw him we took
pictures of them zoom in across the bow
I mean some of these pictures in the
Navy historical collections they had
photographs of the North Vietnamese to
PETA boats but here nobody had an eye
sight no we had an eye sight
confirmation at all and when they
changed the personnel on the sonar
screens all of a sudden the next sonar
guy doesn't see anything well you say
what am I getting reporting so between
eleven o'clock Washington time when the
commander reports torpedo attacks and a
little bit after one o'clock when the
commander says wait a second I'm
thinking that didn't really happen I
think it was just
sonar error and the airplanes overhead
aren't seen anything either and I don't
maybe was flying fishes but already in
that two hour window Washington had made
a decision to go bomb to go shoot back
anybody shoots at us we're gonna shoot
back by telephone from Admiral sharp
that the destroyer is under torpedo of
that I think I might get that Dean rise
came back bunny him come over here and
we'll go over these retaliatory actions
and we ought to thank you and I've got a
category I'll call up to him how are
these 12 meters coming from well we
don't know presumably from these
unidentified craft that I mentioned to
you a moment ago we thought that the
unidentified craft might include one one
PT boat which has torpedo capability
to swat doubt boats which we don't
credit with torpedo capability although
they may have it Washington in Lyndon
Johnson's view and McNamara's view could
want it to shoot they wanted to be tough
there no election season you got to be
seen to be tough so false reports gave
them a excuse to do something they
wanted to do and you see some of the
back and forth and I give McNamara some
credit on this because McNamara actually
paid attention when the ship captain
Herrick sends him that goes for the one
o'clock message McNamara's already
advised the president we're under attack
let's gear up for bombing we're gonna
shoot back you already decided to do
that we're gonna do that McNamara gets
to smile at where this ship commander
says don't think so McNamara goes
ballistic he was pretty powerful
forceful fellow rapper
McNamara and among other things he calls
up the Admiral in charge of the Pacific
community what's what's what's this they
don't think of me you understand that
we're we're already in motion here we've
already had the meetings of the
principal's presence already signed up
we're gearing up we're ready to fly
those b-52s those those you know Hanoi
commies they better watch out we're
coming after him what are they Nina
what's that what these messages saying
there's no new attack and right at that
moment a composite intercept rolls in
this is a summary of those North
Vietnamese naval communications during
the period 1 to 5 August which
demonstrate irrefutably that their naval
boats did in fact engage a pre-planned
combat against our two stories when the
actual attack here their aggressive
intent as early as the 1st of August and
then they just the communications just
means just summarize without giving the
exact source of where they picked it up
but they were just summarizing this top
secret code word dine our document is
what
National Security Agency then provided
top policymakers lakum a chimeric to
continue to defend the position that
second attack did take place it was
aggressive at tint intent and they
basically had left out of this
chronology all the messages that did not
support that story we shot down two
enemy planes in the battle area and one
other plane was damaged this is a North
Vietnamese communication we sacrificed
two ships and all the rest ROK combat
spirit very high we're starting out on
the hunt so that's one version of
translation another version of
translation is that one of the torpedo
boats sweat Dallas reports to
headquarters we shot at two enemy
airplanes not we shot down and at least
one was damaged over here it becomes one
other plane was damaged the this summary
which the top policymakers use we
sacrifice two ships and all the rest are
okay and original we sacrifice two
comrades but all are brave and recognize
our obligation so when you go back to
the original you see the word comrades
when you go to the summaries prepared
after you see the word boats to comrades
becomes two boats two boats sounds like
a huge attack took place two comrades we
now believe are people who were wounded
on the second of August not shot on the
fourth of August there was no attack on
the fourth of August so you can it's
about going back and looking at these
originals which is what the National
Security Agency should have done at the
time but didn't instead they prepared a
chronology that would show irrefutable
what the President had said on national
television
and the story we now know is two
different intercept detachments in the
Philippines pick up some of the same
messages but one of them some Marine
Corps interpreters reads the messages as
a warning of an imminent attack but it
wasn't actually a translation on the
North of India's message it was their
interpretation of a separate message
that was about just refueling the boats
that had attacked on the second of
August so you have this error but
understandable in the sense of you've
got guys sitting there with headphones
on their head translating from the
Vietnamese listening in on North
Vietnamese conversations and on the edge
of their seats because there had been an
attack on the second and their mission
is to get those communications ahead of
time give warning protect American
sailors lives so you can see where that
well that are warned if there's a hint
of it same communications they're also
[ __ ] intercepted by another unit but
that unit translates them as refueling
of those boats that actually are being
replenished I think is the word they use
but because it's not a warning of an
attack that translation goes out at a
lower frequency than the warning of an
attack ones at the critic level and the
others at the priority level so the
critic one comes through the system in
Washington and on the destroyers hours
and hours ahead of the other one even
though it's a translation of the same
intercept and you can see what that does
then that puts the people on the
destroyers on edge
McNamara did a little checklist five
reasons why now we're sure a second
attack took place but two of them came
from just that one false message two
more were from the false torpedo
sightings in the lake so this this
cobbled together message
confirm something that they want to
believe because they'd already made a
decision to hit back the u.s. sorties
were launched for one purpose as a
warning to the Communists that
unprovoked attacks will bring prompt
response
and why would just an attack on the
second not be enough for the resolution
or the escalation because the attack on
the second wouldn't be enough for a
blank check resolution to pursue war for
a couple reasons one is president
McNamara and some members of Congress
like Senator Dirksen the Minority Leader
according to those phone calls that
we've published knew that we were
running our own covert operations
against the North Vietnamese and so they
were responding to us so you couldn't
present the second of August as
unprovoked aggression but in public
statements after the second of August on
the second and the third the president
and McNamara and the others had said if
they attack us again we're going to
whack them if they attack us again we're
gonna shoot back if they shoot at us
again I can't be seen to be weak we're
going to whack them and they prepared it
up contingency plans including b-52
bombers flying off Guam over over North
Vietnam
I set up those meetings for this
afternoon with a sudden house leaders my
thought if it was agreeable with you I
would say to them that some months ago
you asked us to be prepared for any
eventuality in the Southeast Asia area
and as a result of that we have prepared
and just completed very detailed target
analyses of the targets of North Vietnam
as a matter of fact in ten minutes I'm
going over with the Chiefs the final
work on this we have pictures analyses
numbers of sorties bomb loadings
everything prepared for all the target
systems of North Vietnam and I would
describe this to the leaders simply
indicating your desire that we'd be
fully prepared for whatever may develop
and furthermore we've prepared detailed
movement studies of any contingency
forces required air squadrons etc and
say obviously now we'll put this to
paper yes I'm going to tell him that and
your enemy reads about it then he thinks
we're already taking off and obviously
you've got us in a war but I've got to
be candid with you know I'll tell you
the truth exactly I was going to start
my remarks by that be damned sure it
doesn't or Friday make sure it doesn't
get in the paper as soon as those
reports come in even though within two
hours they're being disproved by the
commander of the destroyer supposedly
being attacked but in those two hours
you've already made your just you you're
committed publicly hit him back the
people that are calling me up I just
talked to New York banker I just talked
to fell in Texas they all they will
maybe respond if one plane that's good
but there won't be damn sure I don't
pull him out run and then won't be damn
sure that we affirm that's what all the
country wants because the waters raised
was too much hell about how he's gonna
blow him off the moon and they say that
we ought to do anything at the national
interest doesn't require but we Sharona
always leave the impression that if you
shoot at us you're going to get hit
swift and Shore has been us retaliation
for communist PT boat attacks on the
high seas this is the Maddox one of the
two destroyers that were attacked while
patrolling international waters in the
Gulf of Tonkin near North Vietnam
warplanes from two carriers the
Ticonderoga and the constellation avenge
the unwarranted red assault with 64
sorties to North Vietnam PT bases 25
votes more than half the people were
destroyed and North Vietnam oil reserves
badly depleted it is estimated 10% went
up in flames after direct hits during
the second of August attacks there was a
ton of electronic intelligence and
signals intelligence in between the
boats with directing them all the way
through the period of the attack and the
withdrawal and the damage to the ships
during the fourth of August at the very
moment you have the Destroyers reporting
torpedoes in the water there's no
electronic signaling there's no
communications being picked up
coordinating these these attacks it's
it's I think the historian for the
National Security Agency Han yak said
it's like the Sherlock Holmes story the
dog that didn't bark when the dog on the
inside doesn't bark it means it's an
inside job if there's no electronic
intelligence of the boats talking to
each other means there's probably not an
attack and to me that may be the most
telling of all the we now have thousands
of pages of the primary sources we've
got the intercepts we've got the
internal histories we've got the tape
recordings of the president we got the
photographs of the attack we've got the
State Department intelligence history so
we got the Joint Chiefs of Staff
histories but to me that the document
that leaps out of the whole batch is the
is the White House senior staff meeting
this is the day after this is on the 5th
of August 1964 and we really only have
these notes because the chairman of the
Joint Chiefs of Staff Maxwell Taylor had
been a top Kennedy aide been kind of
sent over to the Pentagon to kind of
bring the Joint Chiefs into line
because they had been pretty uppity
against Kennedy during the Missile
Crisis I think at one point Curtis LeMay
calls Kim it compares Kennedy to to
Chamberlain appeasing Hitler and this is
a really amazing and subordination but
Max Taylor had left the White House gone
over the Pentagon but he kept his White
House passes and he sent his staff over
to the senior staff meeting to make sure
that he max Taylor sitting over there
and knew what they were doing and
thinking so these notes were taken by a
Air Force Major named Bills Billy Smith
who was a Korean War veteran and went on
to be a four-star general himself but
he's sitting in that staff meeting
the morning after so the night before
you had that series of the intercepts
torpedoes the decision to bomb then the
Bombers had gone off Guam North
Vietnamese North Vietnam taking a huge
pummeling so they come in early morning
staff meeting with Georgia Bundy
national security advisors presiding and
buddies as well you know we actually
have less there was a lot more
uncertainty and we have less information
this morning them than we had last night
Bundy says according to these notes on
the first attack the evidence would be
pretty good on the second one the amount
of evidence we have today is less than
we had yesterday this resulted primarily
from correlating bits and pieces of
information
eliminating double counting and mistaken
signals so you got less information
today than he had yesterday and you re
bombed him so sitting in on his first
staff meeting is a NBC News reporter who
just moved over from NBC over the White
House staff Edward our Murrow had done
that moved over from CBS to run Voice of
America I think so it was you know this
was normal I guess in those days Douglas
Cator so it says Douglas cater sitting
in his first staff meeting raises a
question about this congressional
resolution the Gulf of Tonkin Resolution
the one that was going to give the
president authority but do whatever he
wanted to fight back against those of
Vietnamese it became the ultimate
underlying legal authority for the
entire Vietnam War escalation only two
US senators voted against it one from
Alaska one from organ cater says but
yeah I'm wondering they haven't thought
it through completely but the logic
really troubles him somewhat but if if
this attack on forces you're gonna do a
reservation about freedom of all of
Southeast Asia and and you've got less
information today than he did yesterday
so McGeorge Bundy says and I'm quoting
here Bundy in reply jokingly told him
perhaps the matter should not be thought
through too far for his own part Bundy's
he welcomed the recent events as
justification for a resolution the
administration had wanted for some time
they drafted a resolution like this back
in June to give the president authority
to do whatever you wanted in Southeast
Asia his commander in chief but he
wanted Congress's blessing a blank check
he'd been sitting there because in part
we had the upper hand
North Vietnamese or a little bit on the
defense we were probing them with all
these covert operations of plan 34 but
here was this aggression except provoked
by us but the events the recent events
justification for something we wanted to
do for some time this is the
quintessential cherry-picking
of intelligence to reinforce prearranged
pre reached conclusions and it's a
chilling discussion because you've got
them in mini they're less certain but
this gives them leverage to go forward
so the parallels with other disasters in
human history the cherry-picking of
intelligence about Iraq weapons of mass
destruction
oh the yellowcake oh the aluminum tubes
oh oh that doesn't pan out oh that's all
right we we've been wanting to do this
anyway so let's go do it
it's a big illustrates I guess a
perpetual temptation among policymakers
in it partly it's human nature everybody
comes to subjects with their biases and
prejudices but then you're just picking
up the information that reinforces what
you already think this was the beginning
of escalation those bombing raids from
the 4th of August the beginning of the
escalation the really big escalation
wouldn't happen until the following
February of 65 when McGeorge Bundy who's
joking here but saying he wanted to do
this anyway happens to be in Vietnam
when the Vietcong attack outpost happens
to be at that outpost at Pleiku takes it
personally says oh they're targeting me
they weren't we now know from Vietnamese
sources they weren't they didn't know he
was there it took him three months to
organize
this attack to get the supplies down
from the north all by foot all that
stuff it was on a free arranged schedule
but Bundy takes it as a reason they're
attacking this is like the time
candidates it's aggression by the north
it's targeting me we're gonna escalate
this is Pleiku 250 miles north of Saigon
the airbase that was ripped by
Vietnamese communist guerrillas eight
Americans died in the attack that
brought swift retaliation by u.s. and
South Vietnamese forces meanwhile
President Johnson's special assistant
for security affairs McGeorge Bundy
arrives at the scene of the Viet Cong
raid he was in Vietnam on a mission for
the president when the attacks took
place and he holds a battlefront
conference with Lieutenant General Kahn
before returning to Washington while he
conferred with Vietnamese officials the
National Security Council was meeting in
Washington it was these meetings that
brought the swift decision to strike
back at the Vietcong to reemphasize our
resolve to continue to defend the cause
of freedom in Southeast Asia and that
leads them into this incredible
escalation of forces and you go back and
you listen to the McNamara and Johnson
tapes on the 2nd 3rd and 4th of August
and you see this sort of automatic
response in place somebody's gonna shoot
at us we're gonna shoot back not we're
gonna try to figure out what it is that
they're reacting to what is it that they
want what is it they're trying to do put
ourselves in their shoes figure out
what's a way out of this no they shoot
we're gonna shoot back and you just get
into the escalatory dynamic and goes
through 65 goes all the way through 1975
when the last Americans get pulled off
the top of the embassy and helicopters
mr. Bundy arrives back in Washington the
next day and he immediately goes into
conference with the president and the
Security Council
he tells reporters that he found
political and religious factions in
Vietnam United in their belief that the
Vietcong is their common enemy I think
it's fair to say that the Americans in
Vietnam are in very good heart and are
prepared to continue even against this
kind of danger and this kind of sneak
attack I think for American citizens the
lesson is what Ronald Reagan used to say
to Gorbachev about
arms control trust but verify I think
for policymakers the lesson is don't
necessarily trust your gut look for
dissent and debate and this is one of
the questions that the insider historian
asks why would my agency the National
Security Agency is supposed to present
unbiased intelligence to policy makers
why would we slam it and he has three or
four conclusions is one well is pressure
the moment to is precursor messages that
showed attacks were coming three you
know what the top policymakers want to
hear for you saw the president on TV
announcing the bombing attack now you're
gonna be the one to walk in the Oval
Office and say oops
nope wrong maybe shouldn't know you're
not going to be that intelligence
analyst and and the other reasons in
part is that once the top policy makers
take those steps then they really only
want to listen to the folks who
reinforce the decisions they already
made the course of action they'd been
intending to take for a while and the
people who are dissenting from it or
bringing inconvenient facts to the table
either get pushed away from the table
the most famous story Hubert Humphrey
gets elected vice president of the
United States in November 64 sworn in in
January 1965 in February 1965 writes a
long personal heartfelt eyes only to the
president memo about how our policy and
fiat Nam is just wrong and we should not
be doing what we're doing and we should
be figuring out and get out plan
we know a lot about that memo it's been
Declassified we've got the memoirs of
both of Humphrey of Johnson of Humphreys
staff people who helped draft it Johnson
ostracized him for a year cut him off
refused to let him come to Vietnam
policy discussions Alfre had and assited
publicly he hadn't leaked anything he
hadn't tried to build an internal
coalition against the president but he'd
written a critical dissenting memos it
didn't agree with what the president was
doing so the president cited your
disloyal
the vice president you're disloyal
you're not coming to the meetings
anymore it was a year of obsequious Ness
before Humphrey got to come back to the
table well that's how descent an
inconvenient facts are being received at
the very highest levels what happens if
your national security agency
intercepting unless hisses oops and I
guess the final lesson the Tonkin Gulf
here we had the ability to listen in on
North Vietnamese conversations and yet
we did not seem to have an understanding
of what it was they were fighting for
how long they would fight and what that
meant for what we ought to do
we were listening that we weren't
hearing finally I have today met with
the leaders of both parties in the
Congress of the United States and I have
informed them that I shall immediately
request the Congress to pass a
resolution making it clear that our
government is united in its
determination to take all necessary
measures in support of freedom and in
defense of peace in Southeast Asia I
have been given encouraging assurance by
these leaders of both parties that such
a resolution will be promptly introduced
freely and expeditiously debated and
passed with overwhelming support and
just a few months ago I was able to
reach senator Goldwater and I'm glad to
say that he has expressed his support of
a statement that I'm making to you
tonight
Monday night on the communicators three
members of Congress talk about their
technology legislation I believe in an
open Internet a free internet without
government intervention that's you know
when you look where the internet has has
come or it's going into the future this
is all being done for on the private
sector why would he not want their team
exposed their product the brand exposed
to tens of thousands of people so we
think that the blackout rule is
absolutely the FCC took the first move
they will vote finally at the end of
this year but we believe that the NFL
will follow suit it's a bill that tries
to address concerns over must carry
carriage rules over retransmission
consent and basically giving people a
level footing when it comes to being
able to negotiate with broadcast and
being able to negotiate with the
providers and the people who are trying
to delivery trying to deliver that that
media at to the consumer and so puts
people on a level playing field when it
comes to those kinds of negotiations
Republican representative bob latta from
ohio new york democratic representative
brian higgins
and colorado republican representative
cory gardner
Monday night at 8:00 Eastern on the
communicators on c-span to next stories
from three army veterans who served on
the front lines during World War two
they reflect on their experiences as
part of the d-day invasion of
nazi-occupied France this was one of
several events hosted by the Dwight D
Eisenhower Presidential Library and
Museum to mark the 70th anniversary of
d-day it's about an hour and 10 minutes
well good afternoon
and welcome to the Eisenhower
Presidential Library Museum and boyhood
home for our panel on life on the
battlefield our second panel this
afternoon I'm Tim Reeves the deputy
director I'd like to start with this
quote that we used last hour that I
think really puts the war in perspective
and it's by the late distinguished
military historian John Keegan who wrote
that the Second World War is the largest
single event in human history fought
across six of the world's seven
continents and all its oceans it killed
50 million human beings left hundreds of
millions of others wounded in mind or
body and materially devastated much of
the heartland of civilization and of
course that largest single event in
human history affected the lives of the
gentlemen we have assembled here today
and I'll begin our introductions with my
fellow Wichita native mr. Jack Ford here
on my immediate right Jack is a retired
police officer in Wichita he arrived on
Omaha Beach on June 6 1944 with a 740
third tank battalion next to mr. Ford is
mr. Ray Lambert ray was a staff sergeant
with the 16th Infantry Regiment on d-day
at the outset of the war the 16th
regiment was one of the first mobilized
for overseas duty as we'll see mr.
Lambert's experience was more than just
Normandy and we just had a wonderful
moment right before the panel you know I
always like showing off the holdings
here at the Eisenhower Presidential
Library Museum and so I was very excited
to show mr. Lambert the 16th infantry
regiments journal from June 6 1944 and
ask him if he had read it and he said he
had read it and he had lived it
and to mr. Roberts Lambert's right we
have dr. guy Stern who many of us were
fortunate to see in programs yesterday
and dr. Sturm was born in Germany in
1922 and was the only member of his
family to have escaped and come to the
United States in 1937 he was drafted
into the US Army and sent to Camp
Ritchie where he became one of the
Ritchie boys the Ritchie boys were
largely European Jewish refugees who
then returned to Europe and worked in
psychological warfare and other
intelligence aspects during the war and
there is a recent documentary which we
are also fortunate enough to to exhibit
yesterday that I hope you all have a
chance to see at another time and
following the war dr. stern became a
professor of literature I believe most
recently at Wayne State University in
Detroit Michigan I'd like to start with
the same question that we did a few
moments ago with our home front panel
and that's to start with that key date
of December 7th 1941 where were you on
that date mr. Ford what were you doing
what was your first reaction I was
asking about perhaps your reaction on
December 7th 1941 when he learned that
the Japanese had bombed Pearl Harbor I
was asking about the Japanese bombing of
Pearl Harbor
yes and where you were on that day and
perhaps what your first reaction to that
news was oh I remember for I learned me
and three of my friends were out hunting
on that day and we had stopped in at a
local golf course north of the city to
get something to eat
when we went in the golf pro Bazaar and
he told us that the Japanese he was
listening to it on the radio and he told
us that the Japanese had bought a bomb
Pearl Harbor I knew then when that
happened wasn't going to be a real long
a lots gonna be any army and I was about
pretty quick anything else but we'll
move on to hear mr. Lambert's
remembrance of that date as well yes
thank you can you hear me there good I
was in Fort Devens Massachusetts I was
in the army
we'd been training in Louisiana in Texas
North Carolina and upstate New York
making landings in Puerto Rico and we
knew that we were getting close to the
time that we were going to get involved
so that's where we were at a time and
after that with Indian town gap and was
quarantine there until we went overseas
I was in Bristol England and I will
remember every moment of that that
moment when we had already been given
our orders our team of six personnel
members were divided into three sections
one of us was to go in with the
parachutes the second one on on D plus
one and the third one D plus three and I
was we had been prepared to a
fare-thee-well
we had waterproofed our jeeps and so I
went that afternoon to a movie shown in
a movie in a large tent built outside of
headquarters of first Army and so I will
remember a movie that doesn't deserve to
be remembered
it was called shine on harvest boon and
start in unforgettable grace more and
all of a sudden the lights went on the
following personnel report to your
billets immediately to get final
preparations d-day has happened dr.
stern how about your memory of when you
first learned that the United States
would enter the war after the Japanese
bombed Pearl Harbor were you in the army
yet at that time no I I was I was it was
a Sunday that Paul Harbor happened and I
had I was studying at the you know at
st. Louis University and had a Sunday
and weekend job as a busboy in South st.
Louis we were hitchhiking was another
busboy to to our place of employment in
South st. Louis we arrived there and the
owner of the restaurant stood at the
door and he said fellows turn right back
I will not open my restaurant today
something terrible has happened
I kind of like this we could do a
synopsis of your military service
perhaps for all of us up to the time of
the d-day invasion mr. Ford if we could
start with you perhaps about your
induction in the army and then your
training in the tanks
get you just to talk inducted to the
army and then the taking and training
you went with as a tanker and then
perhaps about moving over to England and
getting ready yeah how do you want me go
up yes if you take us up to the invasion
bait just from the time you enter the
army up until about June 6th you talk
about v-day food yes sir go ahead talk
about d-day as well you want to talk
about how one overdraft yes d-day will
we can start with when you're drafted
and take it all the way up through d-day
you like well oh my gosh as quick as I
can
I don't remember the exact date but I
was drafted down October of 1942 went to
Fort Leavenworth Kansas for my physical
when I got my draft notice I was up
there two days wasn't much of us
physical they I was warm and that's
about all you had to do
so they sent me home for ten days and to
take care of any and unfinished business
I had which was to tell my employer that
I had a government job now so I wouldn't
be working for him and when I got back
to the fort leavenworth then I went to
camp function which is on the eastern
edge of the Fort Riley reservation there
I took my basic training but I should
back up just a little bit and tell you
that when we got there I went in on the
train I saw a motor pool four tanks and
I thought well that looks pretty good
you didn't have to walk and I went for
my placement interview and the officer
that interviewed me asked me if I had
any preference on him where I served in
the army and I said totally my sub I
don't know anything about the army but I
saw the tanks coming in on the train and
wouldn't mind that well when I said
tanks he can I did he just started
writing and stamping my paper and I
found out later that not very many
people some people didn't like serving
tanks they called them death traps but
we went to California then on based on
the maneuvers out of the desert training
center these were light tanks the m5s
15-ton tanks that I was in at that time
and we went to the Mojave Desert for
camp fire missiles of the desert
training center for the armored force
while it was there sometimes I think as
a member I got transferred to the seven
forty third Tank Battalion which was
gearing up to go to Africa
and they transferred me down there as a
tank driver and I found out when I got
there that they had the Sherman tank
instead of the m5 tank I've never seen a
Sherman tank but I remember when they
was we went by truck and I remember when
we got there the sergeant called out my
name and told me to follow him and he
took me to a tent and we walked in told
to thank our commander he said here's
your driver that was Etta and